Proceedings 11th International Workshop on Foundations of Coordination Languages and Self Adaptation

Welcome to the proceedings of FOCLASA 2012, the 11th International Workshop on the Foundations of Coordination Languages and Self-Adaptation. FOCLASA 2012 was held in Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, on September 8, 2012 as a satellite event of CONCUR 2012, the 23rd International Conference on Concurrency Theory. The workshop provides a venue where researchers and practitioners could meet, exchange ideas, identify common problems, determine some of the key and fundamental issues related to coordination languages and self adaptation, and explore together and disseminate solutions. Indeed, a number of hot research topics are currently sharing the common problem of combining concurrent, distributed, mobile and heterogeneous components, trying to harness the intrinsic complexity of the resulting systems. Computation nowadays is becoming inherently concurrent, either because of characteristics of the hardware (with multicore processors becoming omnipresent) or due to the ubiquitous presence of distributed systems (incarnated in the Internet). Computational systems are therefore typically distributed, concurrent, mobile, and often involve composition of heterogeneous components. To specify and reason about such systems and go beyond the functional correctness proofs, e.g., by supporting reusability and improving maintainability, approaches such as coordination languages and self adaptation are recognised as fundamental.
  This year, we received 13 submissions involving 35 authors from 10 different countries. Papers underwent a rigorous review process, and all accepted papers received 3 review reports. After the review process, the international Program Committee of FOCLASA 2012 decided to select 8 papers for presentation during the workshop and inclusion in these proceedings. These papers tackle different issues that are currently central to our community, self-adaptation and coordination, processes and coordination, and type systems.  The workshop features an invited talk by Sebastian Uchitel from Imperial College London (UK).
