Dealing with uncertainty in fuzzy inductive reasoning methodology

The aim of this research is to develop a reasoning under uncertainty strategy     in the context of the Fuzzy Inductive Reasoning (FIR) methodology. FIR emerged     from the General Systems Problem Solving developed by G. Klir. It is a data     driven methodology based on systems behavior rather than on structural     knowledge. It is a very useful tool for both the modeling and the prediction of     those systems for which no previous structural knowledge is available. FIR     reasoning is based on pattern rules synthesized from the available data. The     size of the pattern rule base can be very large making the prediction process     quite difficult. In order to reduce the size of the pattern rule base, it is     possible to automatically extract classical Sugeno fuzzy rules starting from     the set of pattern rules. The Sugeno rule base preserves pattern rules     knowledge as much as possible. In this process some information is lost but     robustness is considerably increased. In the forecasting process either the     pattern rule base or the Sugeno fuzzy rule base can be used. The first option     is desirable when the computational resources make it possible to deal with the     overall pattern rule base or when the extracted fuzzy rules are not accurate     enough due to uncertainty associated to the original data. In the second     option, the prediction process is done by means of the classical Sugeno     inference system. If the amount of uncertainty associated to the data is small,     the predictions obtained using the Sugeno fuzzy rule base will be very     accurate. In this paper a mixed pattern/fuzzy rules strategy is proposed to     deal with uncertainty in such a way that the best of both perspectives is used.     Areas in the data space with a higher level of uncertainty are identified by     means of the so-called error models. The prediction process in these areas     makes use of a mixed pattern/fuzzy rules scheme, whereas areas identified with     a lower level of uncertainty only use the Sugeno fuzzy rule base. The proposed     strategy is applied to a real biomedical system, i.e., the central nervous     system control of the cardiovascular system.
