Parametric Dependability Analysis through Probabilistic Horn Abduction

Dependability modeling and evaluation is aimed at investigating that a system     performs its function correctly in time. A usual way to achieve a high     reliability, is to design redundant systems that contain several replicas of     the same subsystem or component. State space methods for dependability analysis     may suffer of the state space explosion problem in such a kind of situation.     Combinatorial models, on the other hand, require the simplified assumption of     statistical independence; however, in case of redundant systems, this does not     guarantee a reduced number of modeled elements. In order to provide a more     compact system representation, parametric system modeling has been investigated     in the literature, in such a way that a set of replicas of a given subsystem is     parameterized so that only one representative instance is explicitly included.     While modeling aspects can be suitably addressed by these approaches,     analytical tools working on parametric characterizations are often more     difficult to be defined and the standard approach is to 'unfold' the     parametric model, in order to exploit standard analysis algorithms working at     the unfolded 'ground' level. Moreover, parameterized combinatorial methods     still require the statistical independence assumption. In the present paper we     consider the formalism of Parametric Fault Tree (PFT) and we show how it can be     related to Probabilistic Horn Abduction (PHA). Since PHA is a framework where     both modeling and analysis can be performed in a restricted first-order     language, we aim at showing that converting a PFT into a PHA knowledge base     will allow an approach to dependability analysis directly exploiting parametric     representation. We will show that classical qualitative and quantitative     dependability measures can be characterized within PHA. Furthermore, additional     modeling aspects (such as noisy gates and local dependencies) as well as     additional reliability measures (such as posterior probability analysis) can be     naturally addressed by this conversion. A simple example of a multi-processor     system with several replicated units is used to illustrate the approach.
