Propuesta de sistema GeoInformático con representación de escenarios para auxiliar en la nueva metodología propuesta por INETER y la UNI para el estudio a gran escala de la vulnerabilidad y daños debido a sismos en las edificaciones

A GIS based software is presented which permits the estimation of seismic vulnerability and the presentation of results in digital maps for single houses, groups of buildings, parts of settlements or even complete towns. Nicaragua is a country with a high seismic activity. The assessment of seismic vulnerability requires the execution of distinct tasks, e.g. recollection of field data, integration of data from the municipal cadastre, reprocessing or screening to test the reliability of the data, definition of calculation of vulnerability functions, calculation of vulnerability for single objects as houses or buildings, calculation of mean vulnerability for certain areas as barrios or squares. In order to reduce time and effort to be spent with several unspecialized tools and procedures, an integrated software system was created, the user of which has not to care about separate software tools for each part of the process. The main advantage of the software is the combination of Geographical Information System (GIS) with the logics that surrounds the specific methodologies of seismic vulnerability index, index of damages and presentation of results. The new software uses a connection with an external centralized Enterprise Data Base which stores all the input information and calculation results and which is automatically synchronized for the presentation of results using GIS. The cadastral information contains data on the constructive type of the house, dimensions, year of construction, type of walls, roof, number of inhabitants, etc.. The system also allows to present damage scenarios for specific seismic events with given hypocenter and magnitude. The documentation of the software serves as a guide for students working on object oriented software engineering by using unified modeling language (UML) and software logic architecture (3-tiers).
