Unsupervised temporal context learning using convolutional neural networks for laparoscopic workflow analysis

Computer-assisted surgery (CAS) aims to provide the surgeon with the right type of assistance at the right moment. Such assistance systems are especially relevant in laparoscopic surgery, where CAS can alleviate some of the drawbacks that surgeons incur. For many assistance functions, e.g. displaying the location of a tumor at the appropriate time or suggesting what instruments to prepare next, analyzing the surgical workflow is a prerequisite. Since laparoscopic interventions are performed via endoscope, the video signal is an obvious sensor modality to rely on for workflow analysis.
  Image-based workflow analysis tasks in laparoscopy, such as phase recognition, skill assessment, video indexing or automatic annotation, require a temporal distinction between video frames. Generally computer vision based methods that generalize from previously seen data are used. For training such methods, large amounts of annotated data are necessary. Annotating surgical data requires expert knowledge, therefore collecting a sufficient amount of data is difficult, time-consuming and not always feasible.
  In this paper, we address this problem by presenting an unsupervised method for training a convolutional neural network (CNN) to differentiate between laparoscopic video frames on a temporal basis. We extract video frames at regular intervals from 324 unlabeled laparoscopic interventions, resulting in a dataset of approximately 2.2 million images. From this dataset, we extract image pairs from the same video and train a CNN to determine their temporal order. To solve this problem, the CNN has to extract features that are relevant for comprehending laparoscopic workflow.
  Furthermore, we demonstrate that such a CNN can be adapted for surgical workflow segmentation. We performed image-based workflow segmentation on a publicly available dataset of 7 cholecystectomies and 9 colorectal interventions.
