Validation of daylighting model in CODYRUN building simulation code

CODYRUN is a multi-zone software integrating thermal building simulation, airflow, and pollutant transfer. A first question thus arose as to the integration of indoor lighting conditions into the simulation, leading to a new model calculating natural and artificial lighting. The results of this new daylighting module were then compared with results of other simulation codes and experimental cases both in artificial and natural environments. Excellent agreements were obtained, such as the values for luminous efficiencies in a tropical and humid climate. In this paper, a comparison of the model output with detailed measures is presented using a dedicated test cell in Reunion Island (French overseas territory in the Indian Ocean), thus confirming the interest for thermal and daylighting designs in low-energy buildings. Introduction Several software packages are available for thermal and airflow simulation in buildings. The most frequently used are ENERGY+ [1], ESP-r [2], and TRNSYS [3]. These applications allow an increasing number of models to be integrated, such as airflow, pollutant transport, and daylighting. In the latter category, we may note ENERGY+, ESP-r and ECOTECT [4] software. After more than 20 years of developing a specific code named CODYRUN, we decided to add a lighting module to our software. This paper therefore provides some details on this evolution and elements of validation. The CODYRUN initial software and its validation Developed by the Physics and Mathematical Engineering Laboratory for Energy and Environment at the University of Reunion Island, CODYRUN [5-14] is a multi-zone software program integrating ventilation and moisture transport transfer in buildings. The software employs a zone approach based on nodal analysis and resolves a coupled system describing thermal and airflow phenomena. Numerous validation tests of the CODYRUN code were successfully applied to the software. Apart from the daylighting model, the majority applied the BESTEST procedure [15]. The International Energy Agency (IEA) sponsors a number of programs to improve the use and associated technologies of energy. The National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) developed BESTEST, which is a method based on comparative testing of building simulation programs, on the IEA's behalf. The procedure consists of a series of test cases buildings that are designed to isolate individual aspects of building energy and test the extremes of a program. As the modelling approach is very different between codes, the test cases are specified so that input equivalency can be defined thus allowing the different cases to be modelled by most of codes. The basis for comparison is a range of results from a number of programs considered to be a state-of-art in United States and Europe. Associated with other specific comparisons, a very confident level of validation was obtained for the CODYRUN initial software [8].
