Integrated Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Education through Active Experience of Designing Technical Toys in Vietnamese Schools

STEM has attracted great consideration. The purpose of research is: (1) study STEM education, (2) explore STEM education with the creative and experiential activity, (3) suggest applying STEM education by designing technical toys for the middle school student. This study used a qualitative approach to carry out teaching integration for STEM education. The study applied to teaching the technological field in Vietnamese middle schools. The design performed at the Faculty of Technology Education, Hanoi National University of Education, Vietnam in April 2015. This study used the integrated approach to design subjects for STEM education. Two procedures for integration undertook with analysis. A sample of producing technical toy was consistent with developing students competencies. Integrated approach to STEM education through designing technical toys is possible. Recently, there has been a booming interest in Integrated Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education, but the approaches to STEM still remains controversial in diverse educational contexts. This study addressed this issue by exploring STEM education with the use of creative and experiential activities in a Vietnamese educational context. It also proposed a practical model for integrating STEM into teaching technology in secondary schools by designing technical toys. The implementation of the practical model suggests the possibility in using the integrated approach to STEM education through designing technical toys for middle school students in Vietnam. By applying the subject knowledge domains to solve real world problems and settings, the students can experience the benefits of a concrete and active learning in a meaningful and practical context. The multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary integration approaches are consistent with the development of the students competencies.
