Design and implementation of computational platform for social-humanoid robot Lumen as an exhibition guide in Electrical Engineering Days 2015

Social Robot Lumen is an Artificial Intelligence development project that aims to create an Artificial Intelligence (AI) which allows a humanoid robot to communicate with human being naturally. In this study, Lumen will be developed to be a tour guide in Electrical Engineering Days 2015 exhibition. In developing an AI, there are a lot of modules that need to be developed separately. To make the development easier, we need a computational platform which becomes basis for all developers to give easiness in developing the modules in parallel way. That computational platform that developed by the writer is called Lumen Server. Lumen Server has two main function, which are to be a bridge between all Lumen intelligence modules with NAO robot, and to be the communication bridge between those Lumen intelligence modules. For the second function, Lumen Server implements the AMQP protocol using RabbitMQ. Besides that, writer also developed a control system for robot movement called Lumen Motion. Lumen motion is implemented by modelling the movement of NAO robot and also by creating a control system using fuzzy logic controller. Writer also developed a program that connects all Lumen intelligence modules so that Lumen can act like a tour guide. The implementation of this program uses FSM and event-driven program. From implementation result, all the features which were designed are successfully implemented. By the developing of this computational platform, it can ease the development of Lumen in the future. For next development, it must be focused on creating integration system so that Lumen can be more responsive to the environment.
  -----
  Sosial Robot Lumen adalah proyek pengembangan kecerdasan buatan yang bertujuan untuk menciptakan kecerdasan buatan atau artificial intelligence (AI) yang memungkinkan robot untuk dapat berkomunikasi dengan manusia secara alami.
