Design and implementation of image processing system for Lumen social robot-humanoid as an exhibition guide for Electrical Engineering Days 2015

Lumen Social Robot is a humanoid robot development with the purpose that it could be a good friend to all people. In this year, the Lumen Social Robot is being developed into a guide in the exhibition and in the seminar of the Final Exam of undergraduate and graduate students in Electrical Engineering ITB, named Electrical Engineering Days 2015. In order to be the guide in that occasion, Lumen is supported by several things. They are Nao robot components, servers, and multiple processor systems. The image processing system is a processing application system that allows Lumen to recognize and determine an object from the image taken from the camera eye. The image processing system is provided with four modules. They are face detection module to detect a person's face, face recognition module to recognize a person's face, face tracking module to follow a person's face, and human detection module to detect humans based on the upper parts of person's body. Face detection module and human detection module are implemented by using the library harcascade.xml on EMGU CV. Face recognition module is implemented by adding the database for the face that has been detected and store it in that database. Face tracking module is implemented by using the Smooth Gaussian filter to the image.
  -----
  Lumen Sosial Robot merupakan sebuah pengembangan robot humanoid agar dapat menjadi teman bagi banyak orang. Sistem pengolahan citra merupakan sistem aplikasi pengolah yang bertujuan Lumen dapat mengenali dan mengetahui suatu objek pada citra yang diambil dari camera mata Lumen. System pengolahan citra dilengkapi dengan empat buah modul, yaitu modul face detection untuk mendeteksi wajah seseorang, modul face recognition untuk mengenali wajah orang tersebut, modul face tracking untuk mengikuti wajah seseorang, dan modul human detection untuk mendeteksi manusia berdasarkan bagian tubuh atas orang
