Fuzzy-based Propagation of Prior Knowledge to Improve Large-Scale Image Analysis Pipelines

Many automatically analyzable scientific questions are well-posed and offer a variety of information about the expected outcome a priori. Although often being neglected, this prior knowledge can be systematically exploited to make automated analysis operations sensitive to a desired phenomenon or to evaluate extracted content with respect to this prior knowledge. For instance, the performance of processing operators can be greatly enhanced by a more focused detection strategy and the direct information about the ambiguity inherent in the extracted data. We present a new concept for the estimation and propagation of uncertainty involved in image analysis operators. This allows using simple processing operators that are suitable for analyzing large-scale 3D+t microscopy images without compromising the result quality. On the foundation of fuzzy set theory, we transform available prior knowledge into a mathematical representation and extensively use it enhance the result quality of various processing operators. All presented concepts are illustrated on a typical bioimage analysis pipeline comprised of seed point detection, segmentation, multiview fusion and tracking. Furthermore, the functionality of the proposed approach is validated on a comprehensive simulated 3D+t benchmark data set that mimics embryonic development and on large-scale light-sheet microscopy data of a zebrafish embryo. The general concept introduced in this contribution represents a new approach to efficiently exploit prior knowledge to improve the result quality of image analysis pipelines. Especially, the automated analysis of terabyte-scale microscopy data will benefit from sophisticated and efficient algorithms that enable a quantitative and fast readout. The generality of the concept, however, makes it also applicable to practically any other field with processing strategies that are arranged as linear pipelines.
