Inter-Technology Coexistence in a Spectrum Commons: A Case Study of Wi-Fi and LTE in the 5 GHz Unlicensed Band

Spectrum sharing mechanisms need to be carefully designed to enable inter-technology coexistence in the unlicensed bands, as these bands are an instance of a spectrum commons where heterogeneous technologies and deployments must coexist. Unlike in licensed bands, where multiple technologies could coexist only in a primary-secondary DSA mode, a spectrum commons offers competition opportunities between multiple dominant technologies, such as Wi-Fi and the recently proposed LTE in the 5 GHz unlicensed band. In this paper we systematically study the performance of different spectrum sharing schemes for inter-technology coexistence in a spectrum commons. Our contributions are threefold. First, we propose a general framework for comparative analysis of spectrum sharing mechanisms in time and frequency, by studying the effect of key constituent parameters. Second, we propose a novel throughput and interference model for inter-technology coexistence, integrating different distributed MAC sharing mechanisms at the same level of abstraction. Finally, we present a case study of IEEE 802.11n Wi-Fi and LTE in the 5 GHz unlicensed band, in order to obtain generalizable insight into coexistence in a spectrum commons. Our extensive simulation results show that LTE/Wi-Fi coexistence in the 5 GHz band can be ensured simply through channel selection schemes, such that time-sharing MAC mechanisms are irrelevant. We also show that, in the general co-channel case, the coexistence performance of MAC sharing mechanisms strongly depends on the interference coupling in the network, as determined by building shielding. We thus identify two regimes: (i) low interference coupling, e.g. residential indoor scenarios, where duty cycle mechanisms outperform sensing-based LBT mechanisms; and (ii) high interference coupling, e.g. open-plan indoor or outdoor hotspot scenarios, where LBT outperforms duty cycle mechanisms.
