A New Communication Theory on Complex Information and a Groundbreaking New Declarative Method to Update Object Databases

In this article I introduce a new communication theory for complex information represented as a direct graph of nodes. In addition, I introduce an application for the theory, a new radical method, embed, that can be used to update object databases declaratively. The embed method revolutionizes updating of object databases. One embed method call can replace dozens of lines of complicated updating code in a traditional client program of an object database, which is a huge improvement. As a declarative method the embed method takes only one natural parameter, the root object of a modified object structure in the run-time memory, which makes it extremely easy to use.The communication theory behind the embed method states that modified complex information represented as a directed graph of nodes can always be transferred back to its original system in an exact and meaningful way. The theory can also have additional applications since today information often has a network or directed graph like structure and it often evolves or it is maintained. The embed method applies the communication theory by modeling the object database and a modified object structure in the run-time memory as directed graphs of nodes without any artificial limitations. For example, different kinds of circular substructures and their modifications are allowed. Persistence in the object database is defined in a well known and accepted way, by reachability from persistent root objects. The embed method also removes structures of garbage objects from the object database if any appear during the update operation, leaving the database in a consistent state. The embed method applies reference counting techniques. It understands local topology of the object database, avoiding examining unrelated objects in the database. For these reasons, the embed method is efficient and it scales for databases of different sizes.
