Backbone Fragility and the Local Search Cost Peak

The local search algorithm WSat is one of the most    successful algorithms for solving the satisfiability (SAT) problem. It    is notably effective at solving hard Random 3-SAT instances near the    so-called `satisfiability threshold', but still shows a peak in search    cost near the threshold and large variations in cost over different    instances. We make a number of significant contributions to the    analysis of WSat on high-cost random instances, using the    recently-introduced concept of the backbone of a SAT instance. The    backbone is the set of literals which are entailed by an instance. We    find that the number of solutions predicts the cost well for    small-backbone instances but is much less relevant for the    large-backbone instances which appear near the threshold and dominate    in the overconstrained region. We show a very strong correlation    between search cost and the Hamming distance to the nearest solution    early in WSat's search. This pattern leads us to introduce a measure    of the backbone fragility of an instance, which indicates how    persistent the backbone is as clauses are removed. We propose that    high-cost random instances for local search are those with very large    backbones which are also backbone-fragile. We suggest that the decay    in cost beyond the satisfiability threshold is due to increasing    backbone robustness (the opposite of backbone fragility). Our    hypothesis makes three correct predictions. First, that the backbone    robustness of an instance is negatively correlated with the local    search cost when other factors are controlled for. Second, that    backbone-minimal instances (which are 3-SAT instances altered so as to    be more backbone-fragile) are unusually hard for WSat. Third, that the    clauses most often unsatisfied during search are those whose deletion    has the most effect on the backbone. In understanding the pathologies    of local search methods, we hope to contribute to the development of    new and better techniques.
