Real-Time Lightweight Chaotic Encryption for 5G IoT Enabled Lip-Reading Driven Secure Hearing-Aid

Existing audio-only hearing-aids are known to perform poorly in noisy situations where overwhelming noise is present. Next-generation audio-visual (lip-reading driven) hearing-aids stand as a major enabler to realise more intelligible audio. However, high data rate, low latency, low computational complexity, and privacy are some of the major bottlenecks to the successful deployment of such advanced hearing aids. To address these challenges, we envision an integration of 5G Cloud-Radio Access Network, Internet of Things (IoT), and strong privacy algorithms to fully benefit from the possibilities these technologies have to offer. The envisioned 5G IoT enabled secure audio-visual (AV) hearing-aid transmits the encrypted compressed AV information and receives encrypted enhanced reconstructed speech in real-time which fully addresses cybersecurity attacks such as location privacy and eavesdropping. For security implementation, a real-time lightweight AV encryption is utilized. For speech enhancement, the received AV information in the cloud is used to filter noisy audio using both deep learning and analytical acoustic modelling (filtering based approach). To offload the computational complexity and real-time optimization issues, the framework runs deep learning and big data optimization processes in the background on the cloud. Specifically, in this work, three key contributions are reported: (1) 5G IoT enabled secure audio-visual hearing-aid framework that aims to achieve a round-trip latency up to 5ms with 100 Mbps datarate (2) Real-time lightweight audio-visual encryption (3) Lip-reading driven deep learning approach for speech enhancement in the cloud. The critical analysis in terms of both speech enhancement and AV encryption demonstrate the potential of the envisioned technology in acquiring high-quality speech reconstruction and secure mobile AV hearing aid communication.
