Deep learning for conifer/deciduous classification of airborne LiDAR 3D point clouds representing individual trees

The purpose of this study was to investigate the use of deep learning for coniferous/deciduous classification of individual trees from airborne LiDAR data. To enable efficient processing by a deep convolutional neural network (CNN), we designed two discrete representations using leaf-off and leaf-on LiDAR data: a digital surface model with four channels (DSMx4) and a set of four 2D views (4x2D). A training dataset of labeled tree crowns was generated via segmentation of tree crowns, followed by co-registration with field data. Potential mislabels due to GPS error or tree leaning were corrected using a statistical ensemble filtering procedure. Because the training data was heavily unbalanced (~8% conifers), we trained an ensemble of CNNs on random balanced sub-samples of augmented data (180 rotational variations per instance). The 4x2D representation yielded similar classification accuracies to the DSMx4 representation (~82% coniferous and ~90% deciduous) while converging faster. The data augmentation improved the classification accuracies, but more real training instances (especially coniferous) likely results in much stronger improvements. Leaf-off LiDAR data were the primary source of useful information, which is likely due to the perennial nature of coniferous foliage. LiDAR intensity values also proved to be useful, but normalization yielded no significant improvements. Lastly, the classification accuracies of overstory trees (~90%) were more balanced than those of understory trees (~90% deciduous and ~65% coniferous), which is likely due to the incomplete capture of understory tree crowns via airborne LiDAR. Automatic derivation of optimal features via deep learning provide the opportunity for remarkable improvements in prediction tasks where captured data are not friendly to human visual system - likely yielding sub-optimal human-designed features.
