Cyber-Physical Security and Safety of Autonomous Connected Vehicles: Optimal Control Meets Multi-Armed Bandit Learning

Autonomous connected vehicles (ACVs) rely on intra-vehicle sensors such as camera and radar as well as inter-vehicle communication to operate effectively. This reliance on cyber components exposes ACVs to cyber and physical attacks in which an adversary can manipulate sensor readings and physically take control of an ACV. In this paper, a comprehensive framework is proposed to thwart cyber and physical attacks on ACV networks. First, an optimal safe controller for ACVs is derived to maximize the street traffic flow while minimizing the risk of accidents by optimizing ACV speed and inter-ACV spacing. It is proven that the proposed controller is robust to physical attacks which aim at making ACV systems instable. To improve the cyber-physical security of ACV systems, next, data injection attack (DIA) detection approaches are proposed to address cyber attacks on sensors and their physical impact on the ACV system. To comprehensively design the DIA detection approaches, ACV sensors are characterized in two subsets based on the availability of a-priori information about their data. For sensors having a prior information, a DIA detection approach is proposed and an optimal threshold level is derived for the difference between the actual and estimated values of sensors data which enables ACV to stay robust against cyber attacks. For sensors having no prior information, a novel multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithm is proposed to enable ACV to securely control its motion. Simulation results show that the proposed optimal safe controller outperforms current state of the art controllers by maximizing the robustness of ACVs to physical attacks. The results also show that the proposed DIA detection approaches, compared to Kalman filtering, can improve the security of ACV sensors against cyber attacks and ultimately improve the physical robustness of an ACV system.
